README.md, before:

# monobuild

A small build system for big repos.

Monobuild is a simple build system (think make) with an expressive, obvious
domain-specific language (think Python). Monobuild is not a replacement for
highly specialized build systems like Cmake, Gradle, or Webpack, but is intended
as a lightweight solution for configuring monorepos

## Examples

```
var pythonBinary = "python";

target main(frontend, backend, python) {
  run("python tool/integration_test.py");
}

with ({cwd: "./site"}) { # Unimplemented
  target frontend(submodules) {
    # Leverage JS tooling
    run("npm install");
    run("run run analyze");
    run("npm test");
    run("npm run build");
  }
}

with ({cwd: "./server"}) {
  target backend(submodules) {
    # Leverage Go tooling
    run("go get");
    run("go vet");
    run("go test");
    run("go build");
  }
}

target python() {
  var result = runWithErrors([pythonBinary, "--version"]); # Unimplemented
  if (result.exitCode == 0) { # Unimplemented
    # Returning from a `target` means it succeeded
    return; # Unimplemented
  }
  pythonBinary = "python3";
}

target submodules() {
  run("git submodule init");
  run("git submodule update");
}
```

## Concepts

### Dependency Graph

Each invocation of Microbuild must have a single target entrypoint (if a target
is not explicitly provided via a command-line argument, `'main'` will be
implicitly executed). Targets specify zero or more target dependencies which are
recursively validated to be up to date before the current target is executed.

### Context Stack

## MBScript

### Keywords

Keyword | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`target` | A build target. See [Dependency Graph](#dependency-graph) for more context. | [x]
`var` | A mutable variable | [ ]
`const` | An immutable variable (attempting to modify a `const` `Map` is a runtime error) | [ ]
`with` | Creates a context block, in which `$cwd` or `$env` is modified | [ ]

### Primitives

Type | Example | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | --- | ---
String | `"Hello, world!"` | ASCII, immutable string | [x]
Number | `12.3` | Floating point number (currently 32-bit) | [ ]
`bool` | `var shouldUpdate = false;` | Either `true` or `false` | [ ]
null | `null` | null literal | [ ]

### Composite Types

Type | Example | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | --- | ---
List | `[1, "b", null]` | An untyped, growable list of objects | [ ]
Map | `{"age": 36}` | Hash map from `String` to any object. Using a non-string as a key will trigger an implicit cast. Attempting to get a value from an unset key will return `null`. | [ ]
Path | `const source = $cwd + "lib" + "main.c"` | An interface over file system paths on the current machine. `Path` overloads the `+` operator to allow concatenating two `Path`s, or adding a string to a `Path`. Note: when constructing `Path`s, path separators (`/` on Unix or `\` on Windows) should never be manually specified. | [ ]

### Control Flow

Keyword | Example | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`if` | `if check() {}` | [ ]
`for` & `in` | `for file in getFiles() {}` | [ ]

### Functions

Function Name | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`run(String)` | Run a subprocess. Does not support paths or arguments with spaces | [x]
`run(List)` | Run a subprocess with support for spaces. Each element should be
either a `String` or a `Path`. | [ ]

### Context Getters

Context getters look like variables prefixed with a `$`. However, they are
evaluated at runtime relative to the current running context.

Constant Name | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`$cwd` | A `Path` object representing the current working directory. By default, a target's working directory will be the location of the build file it is defined in. This can be temporarily modified with the `with` keyword. | [ ]
`$root` | A `Path` object respresenting the current file system's root. Note: this should be used with caution, as encoding `Path`s from root may not work on other machines. | [ ]
`$env` | A `Map` of environment variables when Monobuild started | [ ]
`$fileState` | A `Map` interface around Microbuild's local key/value database file, scoped to the current file. Note, files are tracked by absolute file system path. If a file's absolute path changes, earlier persistent data will not be accessible. | [ ]
`$targetState` | A `Map` interface around Microbuild's local key/value database file, scoped to the current target. Note, targets are tracked by target name and absolute file system path. | [ ]

## Dependencies

Target declarations have what look like a parameter-list; however, this is
actually a list of named targets that must be up to date before this executes.

## Why Not Use...

### Make

While Make's simple architecture the primary inspiration for Microbuild, Make
assumes that target cache invalidation is based on last modified timestamps on
files. This means doing other kinds of cache invalidation (e.g. hashing file
contents, running an arbitrary script), while possible, is awkward and requires
shell scripting and Makefile syntax knowledge.

Microbuild's built-in DSL, MBScript, allows targets to define arbitrary cache
fingerprints. It also has an expressive, obvious scripting syntax, which should
be accessible to programmers coming from different languages, unlike Makefile or
shell.

Commit message:

add more context about dependency graph

README.md, after:

# monobuild

A small build system for big repos.

Monobuild is a simple build system (think make) with an expressive, obvious
domain-specific language (think Python). Monobuild is not a replacement for
highly specialized build systems like Cmake, Gradle, or Webpack, but is intended
as a lightweight solution for configuring monorepos

## Examples

```
var pythonBinary = "python";

target main(frontend, backend, python) {
  run("python tool/integration_test.py");
}

with ({cwd: "./site"}) { # Unimplemented
  target frontend(submodules) {
    # Leverage JS tooling
    run("npm install");
    run("run run analyze");
    run("npm test");
    run("npm run build");
  }
}

with ({cwd: "./server"}) {
  target backend(submodules) {
    # Leverage Go tooling
    run("go get");
    run("go vet");
    run("go test");
    run("go build");
  }
}

target python() {
  var result = runWithErrors([pythonBinary, "--version"]); # Unimplemented
  if (result.exitCode == 0) { # Unimplemented
    # Returning from a `target` means it succeeded
    return; # Unimplemented
  }
  pythonBinary = "python3";
}

target submodules() {
  run("git submodule init");
  run("git submodule update");
}
```

## Concepts

### Dependency Graph

Each invocation of Microbuild must have a single target entrypoint (if a target
is not explicitly provided via a command-line argument, `'main'` will be
implicitly executed). Targets specify zero or more target dependencies which are
recursively validated to be up to date before the current target is executed.

Note: a particular target is guaranteed to run at most once in a build, even if
it is depended on multiple times and its fingerprint has been invalidated by
another build (or a target does not provide a fingerprint). This means that if
one target produces side effects that affect the execution of another target,
the order targets are executed may matter, although this order is not guaranteed
to be stable (other than declared dependencies are guaranteed to run before
dependent targets). If side effects from target A affects the execution of
target B, target B should declare target A as its dependency.

### Context Stack

## MBScript

### Keywords

Keyword | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`target` | A build target. See [Dependency Graph](#dependency-graph) for more context. | [x]
`var` | A mutable variable | [ ]
`const` | An immutable variable (attempting to modify a `const` `Map` is a runtime error) | [ ]
`with` | Creates a context block, in which `$cwd` or `$env` is modified | [ ]

### Primitives

Type | Example | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | --- | ---
String | `"Hello, world!"` | ASCII, immutable string | [x]
Number | `12.3` | Floating point number (currently 32-bit) | [ ]
`bool` | `var shouldUpdate = false;` | Either `true` or `false` | [ ]
null | `null` | null literal | [ ]

### Composite Types

Type | Example | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | --- | ---
List | `[1, "b", null]` | An untyped, growable list of objects | [ ]
Map | `{"age": 36}` | Hash map from `String` to any object. Using a non-string as a key will trigger an implicit cast. Attempting to get a value from an unset key will return `null`. | [ ]
Path | `const source = $cwd + "lib" + "main.c"` | An interface over file system paths on the current machine. `Path` overloads the `+` operator to allow concatenating two `Path`s, or adding a string to a `Path`. Note: when constructing `Path`s, path separators (`/` on Unix or `\` on Windows) should never be manually specified. | [ ]

### Control Flow

Keyword | Example | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`if` | `if check() {}` | [ ]
`for` & `in` | `for file in getFiles() {}` | [ ]

### Functions

Function Name | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`run(String)` | Run a subprocess. Does not support paths or arguments with spaces | [x]
`run(List)` | Run a subprocess with support for spaces. Each element should be
either a `String` or a `Path`. | [ ]

### Context Getters

Context getters look like variables prefixed with a `$`. However, they are
evaluated at runtime relative to the current running context.

Constant Name | Description | Implemented?
--- | --- | ---
`$cwd` | A `Path` object representing the current working directory. By default, a target's working directory will be the location of the build file it is defined in. This can be temporarily modified with the `with` keyword. | [ ]
`$root` | A `Path` object respresenting the current file system's root. Note: this should be used with caution, as encoding `Path`s from root may not work on other machines. | [ ]
`$env` | A `Map` of environment variables when Monobuild started | [ ]
`$fileState` | A `Map` interface around Microbuild's local key/value database file, scoped to the current file. Note, files are tracked by absolute file system path. If a file's absolute path changes, earlier persistent data will not be accessible. | [ ]
`$targetState` | A `Map` interface around Microbuild's local key/value database file, scoped to the current target. Note, targets are tracked by target name and absolute file system path. | [ ]

## Dependencies

Target declarations have what look like a parameter-list; however, this is
actually a list of named targets that must be up to date before this executes.

## Why Not Use...

### Make

While Make's simple architecture the primary inspiration for Microbuild, Make
assumes that target cache invalidation is based on last modified timestamps on
files. This means doing other kinds of cache invalidation (e.g. hashing file
contents, running an arbitrary script), while possible, is awkward and requires
shell scripting and Makefile syntax knowledge.

Microbuild's built-in DSL, MBScript, allows targets to define arbitrary cache
fingerprints. It also has an expressive, obvious scripting syntax, which should
be accessible to programmers coming from different languages, unlike Makefile or
shell.
